Bible

Word of God -  Forever, O Lord, your word is firmly fixed in the heavens (Psalm 119:89)

library of 66 books
1600 years difference between 1st and last books
40 authors
Isaiah 36:14

OT - Hebrew, aramiac, 39 books, around 32 authors
NT - Greek, 27 books, 8 authors

OT
17(history), 5(poems/knowledge), 17(prophecy)
5+12+5+5+12
law+history+poems+big prophets+small prophets

NT
5+21+1
4 gospels
1 church history
9 letters to 7 churches
4 letters to 3 elders
8 catholic epistles
1 revelation

4 apostles (Mathew, John, Peter, Paul)
4 non apostles(Mark, Luke, James, Judas)
Mark - Peter's disciple
Luke - Paul's disciple
James & Judas - Jesus' brothers

Theme of Bible - Jesus


Jewish Bible - Tanakh
Torah
Nevi'im (The Prophets)
    Former Prophets: Joshua, Judges, I & II Samuel, I & II Kings
    Latter Prophets: Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the The Twelve Minor Prophets which are treated as a single book.
Ketuvim
    Poetic Books: Psalms, Proverbs, and Job.
    The Five Scrolls: Song of Songs, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and Esther
    Other Histories: Daniel, Ezra-Nehemiah, and I & II Chronicles
----------------------

Genesis

50 Chapters. Author - Moses.

1-11 - History of mankind (2000 years)
    Creation, Fall, Flood, Babel
    Adam, Abel, Enoch, Noah
12-50 - History of 4 people (350 years)
    Abraham, Issac, Jacob, Joseph
    
Theme - Beginning
    Beginning of material world
    Beginning of human race
    Beginning of human sin
    Beginning of the revelation of redemption
    Beginning of human family life
    Beginning of godless civilization 
    Beginning of nations of the world
    Beginning of languages
    Beginning of Hebrew race 

Message - Human failure met by salvation of God
        Genesis starts with God, but ends with a coffin
        Pairs(Cain&Abel, Noah&contemporaries, Abraham&Lot, Issac&Ismael, Jacob&Esau, Joseph&brothers)
        Abraham - Genesis 12:8,9 - pitched his tent, built an altar, journeyed on
        Issac - offers himself for a sacrifice, finds a bride (potrait of Christ)
                Genesis 26:25 - built an altar, pitched his tent,  dug a well
        Jacob - God changed name to Israel (wrestled with God)
        Joseph - God was his constant companion. Dreamer, slave, prisoner, ruler. Beloved Son, special coat, shepherd, sold for silver coins, going to Egypt, temptations, ministy started at 30 years, raised as ruler, gentile bride.

        Why God chose a people?
            Entrust the holy scripture
            To be God's witnesses in the world
            To bring Jesus into the world

        Beersheba - deal between Abraham and Abhimalech - well of the oath (Genesis 21: 30-32)
        Jehovah-jireh - God will provide (Genesis 22:14)
        Beer-lahai-roi - Well of the Living One Who Sees Me (Genesis 24:62)
        Rehoboth - Lots of Room - For now the Lord has made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land.(Genesis 26:22)

-------------------------------------------------------------

1-2 God makes order & beauty from disorder & darkness
    God creates humans
        Reflection of God's character
        Representatives of God's rule

        choice - trust God's defn of good & evil or seize autonomy & define good & evil for themselves

        tree of knowledge of good & evil and tree of life (Genesis 2:9)

        fall - felt vulnerable. dress to protect from each other
               intimacy with God
        
        promise of WOUNDED VICTOR

        Abel & Cain

        Lamech (Cain's descendent) - first to practice polygamy, boasting of violence

6-9 Flood
        Noah too fails in the garden


11 Tower of Babel - so that we may make a name for ourselves

12 God calls Abram - land, nation, name. I will make your name great. all peoples on earth will be blessed through you. 
        you will be for me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation (Exodus 19:6)


Human failure & God's rescue

     Abraham
        Abraham betrays his wife (12 & 20)
        Abraham sleeps with Hagar(16)

        God's promise to Abraham (15 & 17). 
        Covenant promise - circumcision

    Jacob
        Deceiver
        Steals birthright(27)
        Deceived by Laban(29-31)

        Wrestles with God(32)
        Renamed as Israel (one who struggles with God)


    Jacob's sons
        Joseph hated by brothers (37)
        Joseph enslaved & imprisoned (39,40)
        
        Joseph elevated & saves Egypt & family(41-46)

    You meant evil against me, but God meant it for good (Genesis 50:19)

The scepter shall not depart from Judah (Genesis 49:10)


--------------
Chapter 1
    Day 1 - Light, Day, Night
    Day 2 - Heaven (expanse, firmament, vault, canopy, dome, )
    Day 3 - Earth (dry land), Sea, Plants
    Day 4 - Lights, stars
    Day 5 - Fish, birds
    Day 6 - Animals, humans

Chapter 2
    God rests
    God plants garden in Eden with tree of life and tree of knowledge of good and evil
    Rivers
        Pihon -> Havilah -> gold, bdellium, gold
        Gihon -> Cush
        Tigris -> east of Assyria
        Euphrates
    Adam names all living creatures
    God creates a helper for Adam

Chapter 3
    Fall of man
    God curses serpent, woman and man
    Offspring promised - wounded victor
    
Chapter 4
    Cain and Abel.
    Cain kills Abel.
    Cain -> Enoch -> Irad  -> Mehujael -> Methushael -> Lamech -> Jabal (tents/livestock)
                                                                  Jubal (lyre/pipe)
                                                                  Tubal-cain (bronze/iron)

Chapter 5                                                                  
    Seth -> Enosh -> Kenan -> Mahalel  -> Jared      -> Enoch  -> Methusaelah             -> Lamech -> Noah -> Shem
                                                                                                               Ham
                                                                                                               Japeth


    Adam was 874 years old when Lamech was born. Lamech was 56 years old when Adam died.                                                            
    Noah was born 1056 years after Adam was created.                                                                                                             

Chapter 6
    Wickedness of man
    God decides to blot out mankind and commands Noah to build the ark.

Chapter 7
    The flood
    1,656 years after creation

Chapter 8
    The flood subsides. God gives Noahic Covenant. 

Chapter 9
    Noahic Covenant. Noah curses Ham. Blesses Shem and Japheth.

Chapter 10
    Table of nations
    Overlaps with Chapter 11 (spread in their lands, each with his own language)
    Japheth (14) - coastline people. Europe & Asia minor. Javan -> Greeks 
    Ham  (30)- Cush(Ethiopia), Egypt, Canaan, Nimrod (Babel, Nineveh). Sinim might be China.
    Shem (26)- Elam(Persians), Asshur (Assyrians), Eber(Hebrews). moved east.

Chapter 11
    Tower of Babel - People wanted to make name for themselves. Disobey command to fill the earth (1:28)
    Origin of languages
    Shem -> Arpachshad -> Shelah -> Eber -> Peleg ->  Reu -> Serug -> Nahor -> Terah -> Abram (Sarai) 
                                                                                        Nahor (Milcah) -> Bethuel -> Rebekah
                                                                                        Haran -> Lot ♂, Milcah♀, Iscah♀
                                                                                        Sarai
    101 years from flood to Peleg
    Around 300 years from flood to birth of Abram

Chapter 12
    Call of Abram. God gives Abrahmic Covenant.
    Ur -> Haran -> Canaan -> Shechem -> between Bethel and Ai -> Negeb -> Egypt
    Abram and Pharaoh

Chapter 13
    Abram and Lot part ways
    God blesses Abram

Chapter 14
    Abram rescues Lot. Abraham portrayed as a warrior king. 
        5 local kings rebel against 4 kings from the East at the valley of Dead/Salt Sea and lose the battle
        Abram with 318 men rescue Lot
    Melchizedek blesses Abram. Avoid's temptation of king of Sodom

Chapter 15
    God promises Abram offspring and land and fortells him of slavery.

Chapter 16
    Birth of Ismael

Chapter 17
    God renews covenant with Abram and changes their names to Abraham and Sarah. 
    Gives the covenant of circumcision and promises Issac.

Chapter 18
    LORD appears to Abraham. 3 visitors. LORD promises Abraham a son
    Abraham pleads for Sodom.

Chapter 19
    God destroys Sodom and Gomorrah.
    Origin of Moabites and Ammonites.

Chapter 20
    Abraham and Abimelech

Chapter 21
    Birth of Issac. Hagar and Ishmael sent away. Covenant between Abraham and Abimelech.

Chapter 22
    Abraham tested. Offering Issac as a sacrifice.

Chapter 23
    Abraham buries Sarah in Machpelah after buying it from in Ephron the Hittite 

Chapter 24
    Abraham sends his servant to find a wife for Issac. Issac marries Rebekah.

Chapter 25
    Abraham dies. Esau sells birthright to Jacob.

Chapter 26
    God blesses Issac and appears to him twice. Issac settles in Gerar and Beersheba.
    Esau (Judith, Basemath)

Chapter 27
    Jacob steal Issac's blessings

Chapter 28
    Jacob leaves to go to Laban. Dream at Bethel. 

Chapter 29
    Jacob marries Leah and Rachel

Chapter 30
    Leah -> Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah,                         Issachar, Zebulun, Dinah
    Bilhah(Rachel's servant)          -> Dan, Naphtali
    Zilpah(Leah's servant)                          ->Gad, Asher
    Rachel                                                                                Joseph, Benjamin

    God blesses Jacob by giving him flock

Chapter 31
    Jacob leaves Laban. Takes oath at Mizpah.

Chapter 32
    Jacob prepares to meet Esau. Jacob wrestles with God. His name changed to Israel.

Chapter 33
    Jacob meets Esau, and settles in Shechem in Canaan

Chapter 34
    Rape of Dinah

Chapter 35
    Jacob goes to Bethel. Death of Rebekah’s nurse. Death of Rachel. Death of Issac.

Chapter 36
    Genealogy of Esau

Chapter 37
    Joseph's dreams. Joseph sold to Egypt.

Chapter 38
    Judah and Tamar

Chapter 39
   Joseph and Potiphar's wife. Joseph in prison. 

Chapter 40
    Joseph interprets the cupbearer's and bakers dreams

Chapter 41
    Joseph interprets Pharoah's dreams. Joseph becomes ruler of Egypt

Chapter 42
    Joseph's brothers go to buy grain from Egypt

Chapter 43
    Joseph's brothers go with Benjamin to Egypt

Chapter 44
    Joseph's final test of his brothers

Chapter 45
    Joseph reveals himself to his brothers

Chapter 46
    Jacob and family travels to Egypt

Chapter 47
    Jacob's family settles in Goshen. Joseph and the famine.

Chapter 48
    Jacob blesses Ephraim and Manasseh
    



    




