Chronicles - An account of events arranged in order

From Adam to Nehemiah

Israel's genealogy
David's rule
Babylonian exile

Many things mentioned that are not in the books of Samuel & Kings
    Details of the construction of the temple
        David's preparation (1 Chron 11-29)
        Constuction and dedication of the temple (2 Chron 2-9)

Only the history of Judah and Jerusalem. Not Israel.
The word Zion is used a lot.

Temple 
    is the symbol of unity
    reminds of the high calling
    shows the desire of God to live with his people.

Samuel & Kings are biographical. Chronicles is statistical.
Samuel & Kings are personal. Chronicles is official.
Chronicles contain only the details of Judah after the split.
Samuel & Kings are throne centered. Chronicles are temple centered.

Main Message - A nation's response to God is the decisive factor in its history

Related to Ezra & Nehemiah. All 4  have been 1 book originally. Written by Ezra. Last paragraph of 2 Chronicles fits well with the first paragraph of Ezra.

---

1 Chronicles

History of David's rule

29 Chapters - Author Ezra

Main Topic - You rule over all (29:12)

Main Message - God blesses those who obey Him & punishes those who disobey 

1-9 Genealogy
10-12 God's annointed David
13-16 David moving the ark of the covenant
17-21 God's covenant with David
22-29 Temple

God works for his people
Sets minimum age as 20 for Levite workers (was 30 in Numbers)

Samuel & Kings are from human perspective. Chronicles is from divine perspective.
    eg. in Kings it is mentioned Philistines killed Saul. In Chronicles God killed Saul.
    Forgiven sin of David left out. Census story mentioned to tell about the plot that David buys for the temple
This book magnifies God

----------------------------------

In traditional Jewish order, Chronicles is the last book after Ezra-Nehemiah because it summarizes all of Jewish scripture
First word: Adam
Last paragraph: Return of Israel from exile
Stories about the past that provide a hope for the future
Prophetic hopes
1) The coming Messiah
2) The future of the temple

1-9 Genealogy 
    Emphasizes the line of the messianic king through David
    The priesthood
10-29 Stories about David
    Negative stories left out - Persecution by Saul, Adultery & Murder.
    22-29 New positive stories included - Preparations for the temple
   28:11-19 David compared to Moses. David given plans for the temple like Moses was given the plan for the tabernacle

Potrays David as an image of the future Messianic king.
17 God's covenant promise to David

---
1-36 Kings in Jerusalem
    Highlights kings obedient to God - Success & blessing
    Also stories about unfaithful kings - Failure & hardship
    Character studies

