About the people who returned to Jerusalem from exile. 
Prophets - Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi

Topic - God's word
Message - The place and power of the word of God in the religious, social and civil life of his people.

Looking back - Exodus under Moses guidance
Looking forward - Travel to new Jerusalem

1-6 Return under Zerubbabel's leadership. Nearly 50000 returned.
7-10 Return under Ezra's leadership after 80 years. Around 2000 people 

Esther's book in between the 2 returns. 

Comparing the 2 returns


Leader          Zerubbabel             |         Ezra
Ruler         Cyrus king of Persia     |     Artaxerxes king of Persia 
Number           50000                 |       2000
Goods       vessels of silver, gold..  |    silver and gold and vessels
Destination    Jerusalem               |     Jerusalem
Prophets      Haggai, Zechariah        |   intercessary prayers and teaching God's word
Goal      temple rebuilt and dedicated |   people concecrated

Zerubbabel
    meaning - descended from Babylon
    in the genealogy of Jesus
    heir to the throne of David
    son of Shealtiel 
    also known as Sheshbazzar, prince of Judah
    returned with chief priest Jeshua the son of Jozadak
    they built the altar of the God
    laid the foundations of the house of God
    faced opposition in building the temple
    took 22 years to complete the temple. was blocked for 15 years
    3 different kings - Cyrus and Darius and Artaxerxes

Ezra 
    known as the founder of the great synagogue as he rebuilt the people
    born in Aaron's family
    a scribe skilled in the Law of Moses 
    Psalm 119 is considered to be written by Ezra
    refers to the Law as the word of God
    prays to God about intermarraige and people confess
    continues his work during Nehemiah's time
    transition from prophets to scribes (copy, study, teach scripture)

Tabernacle -> Solomon's temple -> Ezekiel's vision -> synagoges during exile -> Zerubbabel's temple -> Herod's temple->Jesus' body-> Church -> individual Christians -> temple in Heaven (Lamb) 

------
Ezra & Nehemiah

50 years after exile

1-6 Zerubbabel
    Leads a large group to Jerusalem to rebuild the temple
    1-2 Decree from Cyrus - whoever wants to return to Jerusalem, God be with you. 
        Return from exile
    3-6 Rebuilds the altar and later the Temple. Nothing like their glorious past
    4 Zerubbabel refuses from Israelites who never went into exile. Overcomes opposition
7-10 Ezra
    60 years later. Teaches Torah & rebuilds the community
    7-8 Decree from Artaxerxes - Go teach Torah & rebuild your community
    9-10 Many exiles who returned married non exiled non Israelites
        Commnads Israelites to divorce heeding the elders
        Malachi opposes divorce.
        Command partially carried out.
1-7 Nehemiah
    Leads the rebuilding of Jerusalem's walls
    Gets permission from Artaxerxes to rebuild the walls
    Gets armed escort
    Faces oppposition from people living in Jerusalem
    Zechariah said the new Jerusalem would be a city without walls 
    Nehemiah has opposite vision - others have no part
8-12
    Spiritual renewal
    7 day Torah marathon
    Celebrate feast of tabernacle
    Confession of sins & vow to follow the Torah
13 
    Nehemiah tours & finds the people not fulfilling their covenant
    Temple neglected (Zerubbabel's work undone)
    Sabbath dishonored (Ezra's work)
    Markets around the walls 

Begins with hope
Ends in disappointment

Eventhough the people are back in the land, their spiritual condition is the same as before the exile
The book points out the need for a new heart


