First poetic/wisdom book (based on experiences)
Historic books deal with the Hebrew nation; poetical book deal with the human heart

Why righteous suffer? How can a person be godly if he suffers?
How can a person be God-like if he knows nothing about suffering?

What are devil's tricks?
Importance of patience/steadfastness/endurance (sahizhnatha)
Importance of repentance and conversion even for the godly

42 Chapters - Author Job(19:23)/Moses/Ezra/Solomon/Elihu(32:17)

Topic - Trial and Endurance
Message - Trials & sufferings are often seen as chastisement; but they can often come for our education & training

1-2 Introduction
    Job's godliness during his good times
    Satan's lies and defamation
    Job's devotion amidst trials
    Satan's deep hatred towards Job
    Job's devotion displayed even in hopeless situation
3-42:6 Poem - Conversations
    3 Job's anguish & despair
    4-16 Job's 3 friends' talk to Job (1st conversation. Eliphaz, Bildad, Zophar)
    15-21 2nd conversation of Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar
    22-37 3rd conversation of Eliphaz, Bildad and Elihu
    38-41 God explains
42:6-17 Conclusion
    Job's character revealed
    God rebuke's Job's friends
    Job's trial ends and his fortunes

Eliphaz - Hardships are due to sins
Bildad - Hardships are due to hypocrisy
Zophar -  It is difficult to find out God's reason behind the hardships
Elihu - Wait for the Lord
Job - Harship was to destroy and transform me.

Job was transformed. Job's innocence was proved. 

--------
An invitation to trust God's wisdom

Set in Uz; far away from Israel

The point - The author wants us to focus on the questions raised by Job's suffering

1-2 Prologue
   Introduces Job as blameless, righteous, upright man who honors God
   God holds council and Satan (accusor/prosecutor) comes
   God allows Job suffering. Eventhough we assume the book will answer that qn it doesn't.
   The real qns - Is God just? Does He run the world according to justice?
3-37 Dense Hebrew poetry
    Job & the friends
    3 cycles of conversations 
        First Job speaks, then a friend responds, Job responds to it, another friend responds...
        Cycle1 - 3-14
        Cycle2 - 15-21
        Cycle3 - 22-28
        Focus of debate
            Is God just?
            Does God run the universe on the strict principle of justice?
            How is Job's suffering to be explained
            Jobs' and friends' bing assumption:
                If you are wise & good, God's justice will give you success & reward
                If you are evil & stupid, you get disaster & punishment
            Job's argument: I am innocent; so my suffering is not divine justice; so God does not run the world according to justice.
            Friends' argument - God is just; God runs the world according to justice; so Job must have sinned.
        Job's protest - emotional rollercoaster
            God has denied me justice and made my life bitter (27:2)
            God attacks me, tears me up in anger (16:9)
            He destroys the blameless and the wicked (9:22-23)
        29-31 Job's last statement
            Asserts innocence
            Demands explanation from God
            I sign my defense, let the Almighty answer me (31:35)
        32-37 Elihu shows up
            God is just; God runs the world according to justice; Suffering may be a warning to avoid future sins because it builds character; btw don't accuse God.
            Job does not respond to Elihu
38-41 God's response 
    God responds to Job's accusation that he is unjust/incompetant
    Takes Job on a virtual tour of the universe and also about small details
    The point - Job makes assumptions about God's justice because he thinks he has enough perspective to make such a claim. God's reponse - Job does not have a universal vantage point. Job is not in a position to accuse God.
    40A God asks Job if he wants to micromanage the world for a day according to the the principles of justice he assumes. Justice in this world is complex - not b/w.
    40B-41  
        Describes Behemoth & Leviathan
        Symbols of disorder & danger that lies in God's good world
        Gods world is good & not perfect, ordered & wild, beautiful & dangerous
        God's response - We live in an amazing world that is not designed to prevent suffering
        Job: You are unjust. God: You are not in a position to make such a claim
        Job: I demand an explanation. God: I demand you to trust My wisdom.
42 - Epilogue
    Job reponds with humility. I retract and repent. I overstepped my bounds.
    God honors Job's struggles & Job's honesty & Job's prayer. 
    42B Job's family & fortunes restored as a generous reward from God






