Nebuchadnezzar took Daniel captive in the first wave of exile.
greatly loved by God (mentioned 3 times in the book)
no bad things mentioned about Daniel and Joseph
statesman with Godly vision
Daniel meaning - God is judge
prophet - more prophesy about gentile nations
affirmed as prophet by Jesus (Mathew 24:15)
Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah -> Belteshazzar, Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego.

Daniel's prophesy sealed. John's prophesy unsealed
vision - 32 times

many similarities with Revelation

12 Chapters

1-6 History
7-12 Prophesy

Main topic - he reveals deep and hidden things; he knows what is in the darkness, and the light dwells with him(2:22)
Main message - Sovereignty of God. the Most High rules the kingdom of men and gives it to whom he will and sets over it the lowliest of men. ( 4:17)

Teaches about the importance of humility

Compare chapters 2 and 7 (dream of Daniel and Nebuchadnezzar)

70 weeks

Character traits of Daniel and friends
	of the royal family and of the nobility, youths without blemish, of good appearance and skillful in all wisdom, endowed with knowledge, understanding learning, and competent to stand in the king's palace(1:3)
	All the kings realized that Daniels' God is a great God.
	Man of decisions
	Man of prayer
	Man of prophesy
	Faithful man
	spiritual stamina
	had excellent spirit
	gave all glory to God

----------
1 - Hebrew
2-7 - Aramaic
8-12 - Hebrew

1 Recruited to serve in Babylon
	Pressue to give up Jewish identity
	Faithfullness to the Torah leads to exaltation.

2 King's dream. Statue broken by the stone. God's kingdom will humble all kingdoms
	
	3 The fiery furnace. Refusal to worship the empire. Friends exalted

		4 Nebuchadnezzar's pride. Striken with madness. He humbles and humanity is restored
		5 Belshazzar's (Nebuchadnezzar's son) pride. Assassinated.

	6 The Lion's den. Refusal to worship king

7 Daniel's dream. Daniel can't understand the dream until angelic messenger explains it. 
	Sees 4 beasts symobilizing arrogant kingdoms. super beast - really evil kingdom
	Son of Man


8 Daniel's vision about the final 2 beasts in Ch 7

9 Daniel's prayer

10-12 Daniel's 3rd vision
