end of 7 bc 
babylon was in power

focuses on the fall of babylon(Chaldeans)

but the righteous shall live by his faith (2:4) Quoted in Romans, Galatians, Hebrews

For the earth will be filled
    with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord
    as the waters cover the sea.(2:14)

Though the fig tree should not blossom,
    nor fruit be on the vines,
the produce of the olive fail
    and the fields yield no food,
the flock be cut off from the fold
    and there be no herd in the stalls,
yet I will rejoice in the Lord;
    I will take joy in the God of my salvation.
God, the Lord, is my strength;
    he makes my feet like the deer's;
    he makes me tread on my high places. (3:17-19)

1 the prophet's burden/complaints
	God doesn't answer or save. prophet waits.
2 the prophet's vision
3 the prophet's prayer

Habakkuk - to embrace/ to wrestle

conversation between prophet and God more than a prophesy

a priest in the Temple choir

Jeremiah's contemporary.

5 woes
	selfishness ambition - unjust economics
	evil gains(covetousness) - unjust economics
	exploitation (slave labor)
	drunkenness by irresponsible leaders
	idolatory

---------------------------------

lived during the final times of kingdom Judah. saw the threat of Babylon.
Doesn't accuse Israel. Addresses God with his struggle. 
Is God good when there is so much evil in the world?

1-2a Back and forth argument between Habakkuk and God
	(1:2-4)Complaint 1: Torah neglected. Violence & Injustice everywhere. Corrupt leadership
	(15-11) Response 1: I am raising up the Babylonians. 

	(1:12-2:1)Complaint 2: Babylon is worse than Israel.
	(2:2-5)Response 2: Vision about the appointed time. 
					God will bring Babylon down. 
					God may use corrupt nations, but doesn't endorse them.
					All nations are accountable to God's justice. 
					Righteous will live by faith. 

2b 5 woes

3 Habakkuk's prayer. Renew your work in our days. 
	8-15 A future exodus.
	16-19 Hopeful praise. Shining example of the righteous living by faith.

	